[Doc] explain how to upload file with with FormData (#9402)
marmelab/react-admin: docs/DataProviders.md

};
```

The [Querying the API](./Actions.md) documentation lists all the hooks available for querying the API, as well as the options and return values for each of them.

## Handling File Uploads

> When a user submits a form with a file input, the dataProvider method (`create` or `delete`) receives [a `File` object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/File). You can use that `File` object to send the file the format your server expect:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user submits a form with a file input, the dataProvider method (`create` or `delete`) receives [a `File` object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/File). You can use that `File` object to send the file in the format your server expects:
```

- you can [send files as Base64 string](#sending-files-in-base64), using the [`FileReader`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/FileReader) API;

> - you can [send file using multipart/form-data](#sending-files-in-multipartform-data) that allow you to send a whole resource and their files;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- you can [send file using multipart/form-data](#sending-files-in-multipartform-data) (i.e. send the record data and their files in one query);
```

- or you might want [to send files to a third party service](#sending-files-to-a-third-party-service) such as CDN;
- etc.

### Sending Files In Base64

> The following `dataprovider` extends an existing `dataprovider` to convert images passed to `dataProvider.update('posts')` into Base64 strings. The example leverages [`withLifecycleCallbacks`](#adding-lifecycle-callbacks) to modify the `dataProvider.update()` method for the `posts` resource only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following `dataProvider` extends an existing `dataProvider` to convert images passed to `dataProvider.update('posts')` into Base64 strings. The example leverages [`withLifecycleCallbacks`](#adding-lifecycle-callbacks) to modify the `dataProvider.update()` method for the `posts` resource only.
```

    {
        /**
         * For posts update only, convert uploaded images to base 64 and attach them to
         * the `picture` sent property, with `src` and `title` attributes.
         */
        resource: 'posts',
        beforeUpdate: async (params, dataProvider) => {
            // Freshly dropped pictures are File objects and must be converted to base64 strings
            const newPictures = params.data.pictures.filter(
                p => p.rawFile instanceof File
            );
            const formerPictures = params.data.pictures.filter(
                p => !(p.rawFile instanceof File)
            );

            const base64Pictures = await Promise.all(
                newPictures.map(convertFileToBase64)
            )
            const pictures = [
                ...base64Pictures.map((dataUrl, index) => ({
                    src: dataUrl,
                    title: newPictures[index].name,
                })),
                ...formerPictures,
            ];
            return dataProvider.update(
                resource,
                { data: { ...params.data, pictures } }

>             );  

Reviewer 2: This example is missing passing other required params, such as `previousData` and `id`

        }
    }
]);

/**
 * Convert a `File` object returned by the upload input into a base 64 string.
 * That's not the most optimized way to store images in production, but it's
 * enough to illustrate the idea of dataprovider decoration.
 */
const convertFileToBase64 = file =>
    new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
        const reader = new FileReader();
        reader.onload = () => resolve(reader.result);
        reader.onerror = reject;
        reader.readAsDataURL(file.rawFile);
    });

export default myDataProvider;
```

**Tip**: Use `beforeSave` instead of `beforeUpdate` to do the same for both create and update calls.

### Sending Files In `multipart/form-data`

> In case you need to upload files, as you would with an HTML form but to your API, you can use [FormData](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/FormData) API that uses the same format a form would use if the encoding type were set to `multipart/form-data`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you need to upload files, as you would with an HTML form but to your API, you can use the [FormData](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/FormData) API . It uses the same format as a form would use if the encoding type were set to `multipart/form-data`.
```

> In case you need to upload files, as you would with an HTML form but to your API, you can use the [FormData](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/FormData) API . It uses the same format as a form would use if the encoding type were set to `multipart/form-data`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case you need to upload files, as you would with an HTML form but to your API, you can use the [FormData](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/FormData) API. It uses the same format as a form would use if the encoding type was set to `multipart/form-data`.
```

> The following `dataProvider` extends an existing one and tweaks its `create` and `update` methods for the `posts` resource only. It is the role of your API to negotiate the request and process the image. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following `dataProvider` extends an existing one and tweaks its `create` and `update` methods for the `posts` resource only. It is the responsibility of your API to negotiate the request and process the image. 
```

> Its job is to send the `post` data with the attached file and works this way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data provider sends the `post` data with the attached file and works this way:
```

> - it checks if the treated resource is `posts`;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- it checks if the resource is `posts`;
```

- if so, it creates a new `FormData` object with the file received from the form and it sends this `FormData` to the API with the react-admin `fetchUtils.fetchJson()` function (a `fetch().then(r => r.json())` shortcut); 

> - if not, it simply uses the `baseDataProvider` base methods.

Reviewer 2: These explanations are a bit confusing to me because:

- A lot of it is dedicated to explaining when to trigger the FormData implementation, and what to do when it is not triggered ; but the interesting part is actually the rest, not this
- you can probably skip all these details, and focus on the interesting part, by rewriting the example below to use `withLifecycleCallbacks`, and simply linking to its documentation for people not yet knowing how it works
- it is not clear enough (IMHO) that the whole form values will be sent inside the `FormData` object, not only the image file
- The use of `fetchUtils` is an implementation detail, you could as well do it with a simple `fetch`. I'd either not mention it at all, or simply mention it and provide a link to its doc, without explaining further what it does, as it adds unnecessary complexity IMHO

> Lets have a look:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's have a look:
```

```ts
import simpleRestDataProvider from "ra-data-simple-rest";
import {
  type CreateParams,
  type UpdateParams,

>   type DataProvider,

Reviewer: We don't use that syntax in any other place of the doc, so please remove the `type`

  fetchUtils,
} from "react-admin";

const endpoint = "http://path.to.my.api";
const baseDataProvider = simpleRestDataProvider(endpoint);

type PostParams = {
  id: string;
  title: string;
  content: string;
  picture: {
    rawFile: File;
    src?: string;
    title?: string;
  };
};

const createPostFormData = (
  params: CreateParams<PostParams> | UpdateParams<PostParams>
) => {
  const formData = new FormData();

>   formData.append("file", params.data.picture?.rawFile ?? "");
>   formData.append("title", params.data.title ?? "");
>   formData.append("content", params.data.content ?? "");

Reviewer 2: Not sure it's the most relevant implementation. Id' rather do stg like this

```suggestion
  params.data.picture?.rawFile != null && formData.append("file", params.data.picture.rawFile);
  params.data.title != null && formData.append("title", params.data.title);
  params.data.content != null && ("content", params.data.content);
```

  return formData;
};

export const dataProvider: DataProvider = {
  ...baseDataProvider,
  create: (resource, params) => {

>     if (resource !== "posts") {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    if (resource === "posts") {
```

      const formData = createPostFormData(params);
      return fetchUtils
        .fetchJson(`${endpoint}/${resource}`, {
          method: "POST",
          body: formData,
        })
        .then(({ json }) => ({ data: json }));
    }

    return baseDataProvider.create(resource, params);
  },
  update: (resource, params) => {

>     if (resource !== "posts") {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    if (resource === "posts") {
```

      const formData = createPostFormData(params);
      return fetchUtils
        .fetchJson(`${endpoint}/${resource}`, {
          method: "PUT",
          body: formData,
        })
        .then(({ json }) => ({ data: json }));
    }

    return baseDataProvider.update(resource, params);
  },
};
```

### Sending Files To A Third-Party Service

> If the third-party service you use allow this, you can upload files via [FormData](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/FormData) like the previous way.

Reviewer: This is confusing. Why mention formData here? It's not the focus of that section. 

I'd write the following introduction instead:

> A common way to handle file uploads in single-page-apps is to first upload the file to a CDN like [Cloudinary](https://cloudinary.com/) or [CloudImage](https://www.cloudimage.io/en/home), then to use the file URL in the CDN in the record creation / modification payload.

> Lets see an example with [https://cloudinary.com/](Cloudinary) service, by adapting the `dataprovider` according to [their "Authenticated requests" example](hhttps://cloudinary.com/documentation/upload_images#authenticated_requests).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lets see an example with the [https://cloudinary.com/](Cloudinary) service, by adapting the `dataProvider` according to [their "Authenticated requests" example](hhttps://cloudinary.com/documentation/upload_images#authenticated_requests).
```

> To do that, you need an API that serves a [`signature`](https://cloudinary.com/documentation/upload_images#generating_authentication_signatures) the format that Cloudinary expect. To make it easier, you can install the [`cloudinary package`](https://cloudinary.com/documentation/node_integration#installation_and_setup).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do that, you need an API that serves a [`signature`](https://cloudinary.com/documentation/upload_images#generating_authentication_signatures) in the format that Cloudinary expect. To make it easier, you can install the [`cloudinary` package](https://cloudinary.com/documentation/node_integration#installation_and_setup).
```

> The following code example live in a Remix application. It generates and serves the signature needed to send files to Cloudinary:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The followin example generates and serves the signature needed to send files to Cloudinary. It uses Remix:
```

```ts
// handles the "get-cloudinary-signature" route and should be secured

> import { type LoaderFunctionArgs, json } from "@remix-run/node";

Reviewer: loose the `type`

import cloudinary from "cloudinary";

export const loader = ({ request }: LoaderFunctionArgs) => {
  cloudinary.v2.config({
    api_key: process.env.CLOUDINARY_API_KEY,
    api_secret: process.env.CLOUDINARY_API_SECRET,
    cloud_name: process.env.CLOUDINARY_CLOUD_NAME,
    secure: false,
  });

  const timestamp = Math.round(new Date().getTime() / 1000);

  const signature = cloudinary.v2.utils.api_sign_request(
    {
      timestamp: timestamp,
    },
    process.env.CLOUDINARY_API_SECRET as string
  );

  return json({
    timestamp,
    signature,
    cloud_name: process.env.CLOUDINARY_CLOUD_NAME,
    api_key: process.env.CLOUDINARY_API_KEY,
  });
};
```

> The following `dataprovider` extends an existing one and leverages [`withLifecycleCallbacks`](#adding-lifecycle-callbacks) to modify the `dataProvider.create()` and `dataProvider.update()` methods for the `posts` resource only with the [`beforeSave`](./withLifecycleCallbacks.md#beforesave) methods. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following `dataProvider` extends an existing one and leverages [`withLifecycleCallbacks`](#adding-lifecycle-callbacks) to modify the `dataProvider.create()` and `dataProvider.update()` methods for the `posts` resource only with the [`beforeSave`](./withLifecycleCallbacks.md#beforesave) methods. 
```

> Its only job is to send files to Cloudinary it works as follow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It works as follow:
```

- it grabs the Cloudinary signature to allow the autentication in the request;
- it creates a new `FormData` object with the file received from the form;
- it sends this file to the Cloudinary API; 

> - it hydrates the `params.picture` object with the data sent by Cloudinary;

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure you can really use the term hydration here, as it holds a very [specific meaning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydration_(web_development)) in the web world. I'm worried it may be misleading here. Is there a reason I'm missing why you chose to use this word?

Author: To me, hydrating an object means taking an empty object, and filling it with data from a database, network, file system, or whatever. As `params.picture` was not empty, 'hydrate' might not fit in the end.

"Populates" could be OK for you?

> - finally it returns the `params` object to allow the parent `dataProvider` to carry out its processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- it returns the `params` object to allow the parent `dataProvider` to carry out its processes.
```

  api_key: string;
  timestamp: string;
  signature: string;
  cloud_name: string;
};

const endpoint = "http://path.to.my.api";

const dataProvider = withLifecycleCallbacks(
  simpleRestProvider(endpoint),
  [
    {
      resource: "posts",
      beforeSave: async (params: any, dataProvider: DataProvider) => {
        const response = await fetch(
          `${endpoint}/get-cloudinary-signature`,
          { method: "GET" }
          // should send headers with correct authentications
        );

        const signData: SignData = await response.json();

        const url = `https://api.cloudinary.com/v1_1/${signData.cloud_name}/auto/upload`;

        const formData = new FormData();
        formData.append("file", params.picture.rawFile);
        formData.append("api_key", signData.api_key);
        formData.append("timestamp", signData.timestamp);
        formData.append("signature", signData.signature);

        const imageResponse = await fetch(url, {
          method: "POST",
          body: formData,
        });

        const image: CloudinaryFile = await imageResponse.json();

        params.picture = {
          src: image.secure_url,
          title: image.asset_id,

>         };

Reviewer 2: Avoid mutating the function parameter directly. Prefer creating a new object instead.

import simpleRestProvider from 'ra-data-simple-rest';

const dataProvider = withLifecycleCallbacks(simpleRestProvider('http://path.to.my.api/'), [
    {
        /**
         * For posts update only, convert uploaded images to base 64 and attach them to
         * the `picture` sent property, with `src` and `title` attributes.
         */
        resource: 'posts',
        beforeUpdate: async (params: any, dataProvider: DataProvider) => {
            // Freshly dropped pictures are File objects and must be converted to base64 strings
            const newPictures = params.data.pictures.filter(
                p => p.rawFile instanceof File
            );
            const formerPictures = params.data.pictures.filter(
                p => !(p.rawFile instanceof File)
            );

            const base64Pictures = await Promise.all(
                newPictures.map(convertFileToBase64)
            )
            
            const pictures = [
                ...base64Pictures.map((dataUrl, index) => ({
                    src: dataUrl,
                    title: newPictures[index].name,
                })),
                ...formerPictures,
            ];

>             return {
>                 ...params,
>                 pictures,
>             };

Reviewer 2: This kind of return value is valid for a `beforeSave`, but not a `beforeUpdate`.

```suggestion
            return {
                ...params,
                data: {
                    ...params.data,
                    pictures,
                }
            };
```

  picture: {
    rawFile: File;
    src?: string;
    title?: string;
  };
};

const createPostFormData = (
  params: CreateParams<PostParams> | UpdateParams<PostParams>
) => {
  const formData = new FormData();
  params.data.picture?.rawFile && formData.append("file", params.data.picture.rawFile);
  params.data.title && formData.append("title", params.data.title);
  params.data.content && formData.append("content", params.data.content);

  return formData;
};

export const dataProvider: DataProvider = {
  ...baseDataProvider,
  create: (resource, params) => {
    if (resource === "posts") {
      const formData = createPostFormData(params);
      return fetchUtils
        .fetchJson(`${endpoint}/${resource}`, {
          method: "POST",
          body: formData,
        })
        .then(({ json }) => ({ data: json }));
    }

    return baseDataProvider.create(resource, params);
  },
  update: (resource, params) => {
    if (resource === "posts") {
      const formData = createPostFormData(params);
      return fetchUtils
        .fetchJson(`${endpoint}/${resource}`, {
          method: "PUT",
          body: formData,
        })
        .then(({ json }) => ({ data: json }));

>     }

Reviewer 2: This example seems somewhat incomplete, as you never actually send the record id for instance. Don't know if that's a huge deal though, maybe we can still keep it that way since the 'essence' of the example (the `FormData`) is there.
